Create MpTelemetry 2.0 Blog (#4238)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2025-01-22-microprofile-telemetry-20.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Observe microservices using metrics, logs and traces with MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy
author_github: https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeryddy
seo-title: Observe microservices using metrics, logs and traces with MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0
seo-description: Observe microservices using metrics, logs and traces with MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0.
blog_description: Observe microservices using metrics, logs and traces with MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---

= Observe microservices using metrics, logs and traces with MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0
Yasmin Aumeeruddy <https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeryddy>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> A microservices architecture has many well-known advantages for developers such as scalability, flexibility and improved collaboration. However, having a distributed system is likely to make it harder to find the source of latency or inaccuracy that users may experience. There are multiple ways to increase observability of an application to overcome this problem. For example, by collecting metrics, traces and logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A microservices architecture has many well-known advantages for developers such as scalability, flexibility and improved collaboration. However, having a distributed system is likely to make it harder to find the source of latency or inaccuracy that users may experience. There are multiple ways to increase observability of an application to overcome this problem (e.g. by collecting metrics, traces and logs).
```

> link:https://opentelemetry.io/[OpenTelemetry] is a set of APIs, SDKs, tooling, and integrations that are designed for the creation and management of telemetry data such as traces, metrics, and logs. link:https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.microprofile/releases/telemetry-2.0[MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0] adopts OpenTelemetry so your MicroProfile applications benefit from both manual and automatic traces and metrics. These can be collectively exported along with runtime and application logs in a standardized way!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:https://opentelemetry.io/[OpenTelemetry] contains a set of APIs, SDKs, tooling, and integrations that are designed for the creation and management of telemetry data such as traces, metrics, and logs. link:https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.microprofile/releases/telemetry-2.0[MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0] adopts OpenTelemetry so your MicroProfile applications benefit from both manual and automatic traces and metrics. These can be collectively exported along with runtime and application logs in a standardized way!
```

This post demonstrates an application consisting of two services which are hosted on separate servers: 

* *Person service*: Allows users to create records of people, given their name and age.

* *Car service*: Allows users to create records of cars, given the make of the car and the id of the person who owns the car.

> image::img/blog/car_person_service.png[align="center",Diagram of an application with a Car and Person service.]

Reviewer: The image is too large.

When a user interacts with the car service, it is possible that they experience some latency with their response. A developer needs to collect data to work out which part of the distributed system is causing the issue. 

To do this, they can collect: 

* *Logs* from the servers and application to be aware of events and the time that they occurred.
* *Runtime metrics* including numerical data about the infrastructure for the application, for example, CPU utilization and the JVM behaviour including the number of threads and classes.
* *Application metrics* for the incoming and outgoing HTTP requests.
* *Traces* and *spans* to track user operations, including both the requests and responses.

== Running the backend exporters

> 

Reviewer: In the prior section, you need to explain why you will need a backend exporter.

> Before running this demo, it is recommended to set up a a backend system to collect the telemetry data from the application. See the link:https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm[docker-otel-lgtm] repository and clone the repo:

Reviewer: Please explain the popular backend exporter.

[source,sh]
----
git clone https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm.git \
cd docker-otel-lgtm/docker
----

Build and run the image containing all services required for gathering traces, metrics and logs:

[source,sh]
----
podman build . -t grafana/otel-lgtm \
podman run -p 3000:3000 -p 4317:4317 -p 4318:4318 --rm -ti localhost/grafana/otel-lgtm
----

The backend exporter is set up to collect telemetry data via the OTLP protocol which is default behaviour for Open Telemetry. Therefore, additional configuration for the exporter is not required in the application.

image::img/blog/otel-lgtm-car-person.png[align="center",Diagram of the otel lgtm backend exporter with the Car and Person service.]

== Start the demo

Check out the demo repo and clone the repository: 

git clone https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo.git

> Each service has MpTelemetry 2.0 and Monitor-1.0 enabled in its link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo/blob/main/car/src/main/liberty/config/server.xml#L8[server]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each service has `mpTelemetry-2.0` and `monitor-1.0` enabled in its link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo/blob/main/car/src/main/liberty/config/server.xml#L8[server]:
```

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
        <feature>mpTelemetry-2.0</feature>
        <feature>monitor-1.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

> By default, MicroProfile Telemetry is off. To collect and export telemetry data, enable OpenTelemetry by using the following system property or environment variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to performance concerns, MicroProfile Telemetry is disabled by default. To collect and export telemetry data, enable OpenTelemetry by using the following system property or environment variable:
```

    <!-- enable visibility to third party apis -->
    <classloader apiTypeVisibility="+third-party"/>
</webApplication>
----

=== Use the OpenTelemetry API to manually create metrics

In addition to the supported runtime metric components, you can also use the OpenTelemetry metrics API to define custom metrics in your application code.
Before instrumenting your code, the following prerequisite is required:

• Third-party APIs must be made visible for your application in the link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/mpTelemetry-Demo/blob/main/system/src/main/liberty/config/server.xml#L11-L14[server.xml]:

[source, xml]
----
<webApplication location="demo-microprofile-telemetry-inventory.war" contextRoot="/">
    <!-- enable visibility to third party apis -->
    <classloader apiTypeVisibility="+third-party"/>
</webApplication>
----

The OpenTelemetry API can then be to create custom metrics. In link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo/blob/main/car/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/car/CarService.java#L101-L108[`CarService.java`], `Meter` is used to define instruments, in this case, a counter.

[source,java]
----
@Inject
Meter meter;

> @Inject

Reviewer: duplication

Meter meter;

LongCounter carCreatedCounter;

@PostConstruct
public void init(){
    carCreatedCounter = meter.counterBuilder("car.created").build();
}
----

The value of the counter is incremented in the link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo/blob/main/car/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/car/CarService.java#L117[`createCar` method]:

[source, java]
----
carCreatedCounter.add(1);
----

For a full list of available metrics, see the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/api/#meter-operations#default[meter operations] in the OpenTelemetry documentation.

Start the Car service:

[source, sh]
----
cd car \

> mvn liberty:run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mvn liberty:dev
```

image::img/blog/car_person_service.png[align="center",width=50%,Diagram of an application with a Car and Person service.]

When a user interacts with the car service, they experience some latency with their response but the reason for this is not yet clear. There are numerous possibilities that could cause the latency such as network unreliability, hardware limitations, request timeouts and code complexity. The exact operation that has the problem is not always obvious. Therefore, we would need to collect data to work out which part of the distributed system is causing the issue.

To do this, we can collect:

* *Logs* from the servers and application to be aware of events and the time that they occurred.
* *Runtime metrics* including numerical data about the infrastructure for the application, for example, CPU utilization and the JVM behaviour including the number of threads and classes.
* *Application metrics* for the incoming and outgoing HTTP requests.
* *Traces* and *spans* to track user operations, including both the requests and responses.

Exporters are systems that send data to a backend service so you can visualise and monitor the spans, metrics and logs.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following section illustrates how to set up a backend service.
```

== Running the monitoring backend

> Before running this demo, it is recommended to set up a backend system to collect the telemetry data from the application. See the link:https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm[docker-otel-lgtm] repository and clone the repo:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The backend system is to collect the telemetry data from the application. See the link:https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm[docker-otel-lgtm] repository and clone the repo:
```

[source,sh]
----
git clone https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm.git \
cd docker-otel-lgtm/docker
----

Build and run the image containing all services required for gathering traces, metrics and logs:

[source,sh]
----
podman build . -t grafana/otel-lgtm \
podman run -p 3000:3000 -p 4317:4317 -p 4318:4318 --rm -ti localhost/grafana/otel-lgtm
----

The backend system is set up to collect telemetry data via the OTLP protocol which is default behaviour for Open Telemetry. Therefore, additional configuration for the exporter is not required in the application.

image::img/blog/otel-lgtm-car-person.png[align="center",width=50%,Diagram of the otel lgtm backend exporter with the Car and Person service.]

> == Start the demo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== The Demo App
```

> == Start the demo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== The Demo App
```

Exporters are systems that send data to a backend service so you can visualise and monitor the spans, metrics and logs.

The following section illustrates how to set up a backend service.

== Running the monitoring backend

The backend system is set up to collect the telemetry data from the application. See the link:https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm[docker-otel-lgtm] repository and clone the repo:

[source,sh]
----
git clone https://github.com/grafana/docker-otel-lgtm.git \
cd docker-otel-lgtm/docker
----

Build and run the image containing all services required for gathering traces, metrics and logs:

[source,sh]
----
podman build . -t grafana/otel-lgtm \
podman run -p 3000:3000 -p 4317:4317 -p 4318:4318 --rm -ti localhost/grafana/otel-lgtm
----

The backend system is set up to collect telemetry data via the OTLP protocol which is default behaviour for Open Telemetry. Therefore, additional configuration for the exporter is not required in the application.

image::img/blog/otel-lgtm-car-person.png[align="center",width=50%,Diagram of the otel lgtm backend exporter with the Car and Person service.]

== The demo app

Check out the demo repo and clone the repository: 

> git clone https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo.git

Reviewer 2: should this be in code format, similar to the previous clone command example?

Each service has `mpTelemetry2.0` and `monitor-1.0` enabled in its link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo/blob/main/car/src/main/liberty/config/server.xml#L8[server]:

> [source,xml]

Reviewer 2: none of our existing docs for mptelemetry mention enabling monitor-1.0. If this is a requirement, or even a common use case, please open a doc bug that explains how we can provide this information in the docs

[source,xml]
----
<mpTelemetry source="message"/>
----

For a full list of available logging event types, see the link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/mptel-log-events-list.html[MicroProfile Telemetry log events reference list].

== Automatic instrumentation

Without any code instrumentation, the following components are automatically collected and exported to the backend exporter in the `Person` service:

* Runtime metrics including:
* ThreadPool
* Sessions
* RequestTiming
* ConnectionPool
* HTTP metrics
* Message logs
* Requests and responses to Jakarta RESTful Web Services

Start the `Person` service:

[source, sh]
----
cd person \
mvn liberty:dev
----

To create a new person with the name Bob and age 21, navigate to:

[source,sh]
----
http://localhost:9080/people/createPerson?name=bob&age=21
----

You will see confirmation that a person has been created with a unique id:

`Person created with id 5859008369859564999`

To view all the people that you have created, navigate to:

[source,sh]
----
http://localhost:9080/people
----

You should see a result like the following, with the unique id shown previously: 

`{"age":21,"id":5859008369859564999,"name":"bob"}`

> View the traces that were automatically created from your request in the Grafana link:http://localhost:3000/explore?schemaVersion=1&panes=%7B%22xze%22:%7B%22datasource%22:%22tempo%22,%22queries%22:%5B%7B%22refId%22:%22A%22,%22datasource%22:%7B%22type%22:%22tempo%22,%22uid%22:%22tempo%22%7D,%22queryType%22:%22traceqlSearch%22,%22limit%22:20,%22tableType%22:%22traces%22,%22filters%22:%5B%7B%22id%22:%224d7a67f7%22,%22operator%22:%22%3D%22,%22scope%22:%22span%22%7D%5D%7D%5D,%22range%22:%7B%22from%22:%22now-1h%22,%22to%22:%22now%22%7D%7D%7D&orgId=1[dashboard]. 

Reviewer 2: the grafana dashboard needs some kind of introduction- I assume that if you are running the demo, these links will resolve.

I think the grafana dashboard is provided by the backend you set up in "Running the monitoring backend"? If that's the case, we should clearly state that before the first reference to the dashboard at line 148

View an overview of the JVM metrics, including the number of classes, CPU utilization and heap memory utilization in the link:http://localhost:3000/d/b91844d7-121e-4d0a-93b8-a9c1a05703b3/jvm-overview-opentelemetry?orgId=1&from=now-15m&to=now&var-datasource=prometheus&var-job=person&var-instance=All[dashboard].

image::img/blog/jvm-metrics.png[align="center", JVM metrics from Person service.]

View an overview of the HTTP metrics to see graphs that show the duration of HTTP requests in the link:http://localhost:3000/d/f543a537-cb96-470d-a349-660ad1513136/red-metrics-classic-histogram?orgId=1&from=now-5m&to=now[dashboard].

image::img/blog/http-metrics.png[align="center", HTTP metrics from Person service.]

=== Use the OpenTelemetry API to manually create metrics

In addition to the supported runtime metric components, you can also use the OpenTelemetry metrics API to define custom metrics in your application code.
Before instrumenting your code, the following prerequisite is required:

> • Third-party APIs must be made visible for your application in the link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo/blob/main/car/src/main/liberty/config/server.xml#L18[server.xml]:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
• Add the following configuration in your link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo/blob/main/car/src/main/liberty/config/server.xml#L18[server.xml] to make third-party APIs visible for your application:
```

> 

Reviewer 2: is this already set in the demo server/.xml, or does the reader need to make the change? If the latter, we should clearly state that

[source, xml]
----
<webApplication location="demo-microprofile-telemetry-car.war" contextRoot="/">
    <!-- enable visibility to third party apis -->
    <classloader apiTypeVisibility="+third-party"/>
</webApplication>
----

> The OpenTelemetry API can then be to create custom metrics. In link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo/blob/main/car/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/car/CarService.java#L101-L108[`CarService.java`], `Meter` is used to define instruments, in this case, a counter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can the use the OpenTelemetry API to create custom metrics. In link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo/blob/main/car/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/car/CarService.java#L101-L108[`CarService.java`], `Meter` is used to define instruments, in this case, a counter.
```

=== Observe application logs

Log messages are created in link:https://github.com/yasmin-aumeeruddy/car-person-demo/blob/main/car/src/main/java/io/openliberty/demo/client/PersonClient.java#L43[`PersonClient.java`] to show when events occur. For example, an `INFO` message is created when a new client is built:

[source, java]
----
private static final Logger julLogger = Logger.getLogger("jul-logger");

...

private void initHelper(String hostname, int port, Long personId) {
    this.url = buildUrl(PROTOCOL, hostname, port, PEOPLE + personId);
    julLogger.log(Level.INFO, "Building client for url " + url);
    this.clientBuilder = buildClientBuilder(this.url);
}
----

You can see the application logs in the link:http://localhost:3000/explore?schemaVersion=1&panes=%7B%224j4%22:%7B%22datasource%22:%22loki%22,%22queries%22:%5B%7B%22refId%22:%22A%22,%22expr%22:%22%7Bservice_name%3D%5C%22car%5C%22%7D%20%7C%3D%20%60%60%22,%22queryType%22:%22range%22,%22datasource%22:%7B%22type%22:%22loki%22,%22uid%22:%22loki%22%7D,%22editorMode%22:%22builder%22%7D%5D,%22range%22:%7B%22from%22:%22now-1h%22,%22to%22:%22now%22%7D%7D%7D&orgId=1[dashboard].

> === Use the OpenTelemetry API to manually create traces

Reviewer 2: should we clarify that this is only required if you want custom trace? Is that correct?
